ALLEGIANCE TO THE
FLAG OF THE UNITED STATES
OF AMERICA AND TO THE REPUBLIC
FOR WHICH IT STANDS ONE NATION
UNDER GOD INDIVISIBLE WITH
LIBERTY AND JUSTICE FOR ALL BUT
I CAN'T PLEASE CALL THE ROLE
OF COUNSEL COUNCIL MEMBER DISH
HERE COUNCILOR HARRISON UPSET
BECAUSE FOR WATSON HERE OUR
BALLOT HERE HAS ALREADY KNOCKED
HERE HOUSE MURKOWSKI HAD WON
HERE, MAYOR TAYLOR HERE
ELSEWHERE EITHER HERE OR
ELSEWHERE.
ACKMANN ABSENT COUNCILMAN
BRIGGS HERE OR ELSEWHERE HERE
WE HAVE A QUORUM MADE A MOTION
PLEASE TO APPROVE THE AGENDA
MOVE BY COUNCILOR HARRIS TAKING
MY COUNCIL MEMBER BRIGGS
DISCUSSION OF THE AGENDA ALL
FAVOR OR OPPOSE THE AGENDA IS
APPROVED.
>> DO WE HAVE ANY COMMISSION
COMMUNICATIONS TODAY FROM OUR
CITY ADMINISTRATOR?
>> NO MAYOR.
WE ARE FORTUNATE TO HAVE TWO
INTRODUCTIONS TODAY.
FIRST FROM THE CHAIR OF THE
INDEPENDENT COMMUNITY POLICE
OVERSIGHT COMMISSION, AN UPDATE
FROM CHAIR CARTER CHAIR CARTER
,MAYOR CHAIR CARTER WILL BE
JOINING US ON SOON.
>> EXCELLENT
.
OK, GOOD EVENING.
CAN YOU HEAR ME NOW?
YES WE CAN.
THANK YOU.
OH GOOD.
GOOD THANK YOU.
GOOD EVENING MAYOR AND MR. CITY
ADMINISTRATOR PERSONS I'M OUT
OF TOWN AND SO THAT IS WHY I'M
JOINING YOU IN THIS MANNER
TODAY.
AS YOU MAY KNOW IT PORK DOES
NOT MEET IN JULY OR AUGUST AND
SO WHILE WE HAVE NOT HAD A
MEETING SINCE JUNE, WORK
CONTINUES WITH OUR COMMITTEES
AND WE STILL HAVE COMPLAINTS
ALTHOUGH WE HAVE HAD VERY FEW
COMPLAINTS THIS SUMMER AND THAT
IS A VERY GOOD THING WE BELIEVE
THAT THIS LAST WORK YEAR WE HAD
MORE PUBLIC EVENTS, COMMUNITY
THAN WE'VE HAD IN THE PAST AND
WE HAVE INSTITUTED A PLANNING
COMMITTEE AND THIS COMING YEAR
WE'RE HOPING TO HAVE SEVERAL
MORE EVENTS WHERE THE PUBLIC
CAN COME IN AND WE'RE ASKING
THE PUBLIC IF YOU HAVE TOPICS
THAT YOU ARE INTERESTED IN WITH
WITH REGARD TO POLICE
OVERSIGHT, WITH REGARD TO
POLICE PRACTICES, WE WOULD VERY
MUCH LIKE TO HEAR FROM THE FROM
THE COMMUNITY AS TO HOW WE CAN
BRING IN EXPERTS AND AND SO
FORTH AND THAT'S WHAT WE'RE
LOOKING FORWARD TO THIS COMING
YEAR.
ALSO WE WILL BE MEETING
NORMALLY OUR MEETINGS ARE THE
FOURTH TUESDAY OF EVERY MONTH
BUT IN SEPTEMBER BECAUSE OF A
HOLIDAY WILL BE MEETING ON
SEPTEMBER 30TH.
THAT'LL BE OUR MEETING FOR
SEPTEMBER AND OF COURSE WE HAVE
PUBLIC COMMENT AT THE BEGINNING
OF EACH MEETING WE INVITE THE
PUBLIC TO COME AND ALSO LASTLY
WE WE HAVE CURRENTLY A VACANCY
ON THE COMMISSION AND WE ARE
ACTIVELY SOLICITING PEOPLE TO
JOIN TO COME FILL OUT AN
APPLICATION.
THEY CAN DO IT EITHER ONLINE
THROUGH THE CITY WEBSITE OR
CONTACT THE COMMISSION OFFICE.
SO THAT IS WHERE WE ARE.
WE LOOK FORWARD TO STARTING OUR
WORK YEAR AGAIN ON SEPTEMBER
30TH IF THERE ARE NO QUESTIONS,
THAT IS THE END OF MY REPORT
FOR TODAY.
THANK YOU VERY MUCH FOR YOUR
CAR.
THANK YOU.
>> WE DON'T HAVE THE PLEASURE
OF A REPORT FROM THE EXECUTIVE
DIRECTOR OF THE DOWNTOWN
DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY CHERTOFF
CHAIR TOPS OR DIRECTOR
THOMPSON.
>> THANK YOU.
YOU HAVE THE COME HI THERE WE
GO.
I THINK I'LL PUT THIS IN SLIDE
SHOW.
OK, THANK FOR YOUR PATIENCE.
>> SO TONIGHT I AM HERE TO GIVE
YOU AN UPDATE
ON OUR
DEVELOPMENT PLAN.
I WANT TO JUST BRIEFLY TALK
ABOUT PLAN REQUIREMENTS AND
THEN DOVE RIGHT INTO SOME
UPDATED RECOMMENDATIONS SO
STATE STATUTE DICTATES WHAT IS
INCLUDED IN OUR DEVELOPMENT AND
TEEF PLAN AND WHEN YOU ALL
RECEIVE THE PLAN FOR
CONSIDERATION YOU'LL ACTUALLY
BE RECEIVING TWO PLANS.
THERE ARE TWO SEPARATE PLANS.
THERE IS A DEVELOPMENT PLAN
WHICH ESTABLISHES THE BOUNDARY
AND THE ACTIVITIES THAT DIVA
WILL UNDERTAKE OVER THE NEXT 30
YEARS.
AND THEN THERE IS THE TAX
INCREMENT FINANCE PLAN WHICH
SPEAKS TO THE COLLECTION
OF THAT TAX INCREMENT REVENUE
AND HOW THAT WILL BE USED.
SO HOW WILL WE USE THE
DEVELOPMENT PLAN?
THESE PLANS ARE REALLY A
DEMONSTRATE TO OUR COMMUNITY
OF THE WORK THAT WE INTEND TO
TAKE ON OVER THE NEXT 30 YEARS.
THEY'RE ALSO AN IMPLEMENTATION
ROADMAP FOR STAFF SO WE WILL BE
USING THIS DEVELOPMENT PLAN AS
WE DO OUR ANNUAL CAPITAL
IMPROVEMENT PLANNING WORK AND
OUR BUDGET WORK.
AND THEN ON THE BOARD SIDE THIS
IS A REFERENCE DOCUMENT TO
GUIDE THEM IN THEIR DECISION
MAKING AND IN THEIR OVERSIGHT
OF STAFF.
SO AS YOU MAY RECALL, WE WERE
HERE IN APRIL.
WE DID A FAIRLY COMPREHENSIVE
OVERVIEW OF OUR DRAFT
DEVELOPMENT PLAN SINCE THAT
TIME CITY STAFF CITY
ADMINISTRATION STAFF HAVE BEEN
MEETING TO REVIEW THE
RECOMMENDATIONS THAT WE
INCLUDED IN THE PLAN AND AS YOU
MAY RECALL, WE INCLUDED A
MODERATE BOUNDARY EXPANSION, A
SHIFT IN OUR TIF DISTRIBUTION
MODEL TO A GAIN SHARE MODEL AND
WE BELIEVE THAT TOGETHER THOSE
CHANGES WILL ALLOW THE DAY TO
MAKE THE INVESTMENT NEEDED IN
DOWNTOWN TO SUPPORT OUR
DOWNTOWN INTO THE FUTURE.
SO SINCE THAT TIME OUR BOUNDARY
RECOMMENDATION HAS BEEN
UPDATED.
YOU MAY RECALL WE ORIGINALLY
WERE RECOMMENDING AN EXPANSION
TO BOTH THE NORTH AND THE SOUTH
AFTER OUR MEETINGS WITH CITY
ADMINISTRATION WE HAVE LANDED
ON AN UPDATED RECORD AND
WHAT
YOU WILL SEE IN THE PLAN IS A
RECOMMENDATION FOR EXPANSION TO
THE NORTH.
THIS WILL BE REFERENCED AS
EXPANSION AREA ONE.
WE BELIEVE THAT EXPANDING TO
THE NORTH STRENGTHENS OUR
EXISTING DISTRICT BY ALLOWING
US TO MAKE IMPROVEMENTS TO TWO
OF THE KEY GATEWAYS TO OUR
DOWNTOWN.
IT ALSO ALLOWS US TO CONNECT
OUR EXISTING DISTRICT TO THE
RIVER AND IT ALLOWS THE DDA TO
PARTICIPATE IN SOME KEY
PROJECTS THAT RANKED VERY HIGH
AS WE DID OUR PLANNING WITH
IDENTIFYING FUTURE PROJECTS ON
THE PLAN SIDE, THE
RECOMMENDATION THAT WE SHARED
WITH YOU IN APRIL WAS A SWITCH
TO A GAIN SHARE MODEL THAT
RECOMMENDATION HAS NOT CHANGED
OTHER THAN THE TIMING.
WHEN WE WERE HERE IN APRIL WE
WERE SUGGESTING THAT THE GAIN
SHARE MODEL IN THE EXISTING
DISTRICT WOULD NOT KICK IN
UNTIL YEAR 10.
>> WE ARE REVISING THAT
RECOMMENDATION AND WE BELIEVE
THE GAIN TO YOUR MODEL SHOULD
BE IMPLEMENTED IN YEAR ONE FOR
BOTH THE EXISTING DISTRICT AND
THE EXPANDED DISTRICT.
>> AND JUST TO GO OVER WHAT
THAT MODEL LOOKS LIKE, THIS
GRAPH WILL SHOW YOU THE DARK
ORANGE AREA AT THE BOTTOM THAT
IS THE BASE VALUE ALONG WITH
INFLATION AND PROPERTY SALES
THAT THE TAXING UNITS CONTINUE
TO CAPTURE SO THAT NOTHING
CHANGES WITH THAT REVENUE.
THE AREA ABOVE ORANGE AREA IS
THE REVENUE GROWTH FROM NEW
DEVELOPMENT OF THAT IS THE TIF
REVENUE.
WHAT WE ARE RECOMMENDING IS
THAT THE TAXING UNITS RECEIVE
THIRTY PERCENT OF THAT REVENUE
GROWTH FROM NEW DEVELOPMENT AND
THE DDA CAPTURES SEVENTY
PERCENT OF THAT REVENUE.
WE BELIEVE THAT THIS IS A
SUSTAINABLE MODEL THAT ALLOWS
THE DDA TO MAKE THE INVESTMENTS
THAT WE NEED TO MAKE WHILE ALSO
ALLOWING TAXING UNITS TO
BENEFIT FROM THAT NEW
DEVELOPMENT AND THAT REVENUE
GROWTH SO ON THE PROJECTS AND
PROGRAMS SIDE THE BULK OF THE
DEVELOPMENT PLAN WILL BE THE
PROJECTS AND PROGRAMS.
ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTY PROJECTS
AND PROGRAMS WERE IDENTIFIED
THROUGH THE WORK WE DID IN
ESTABLISHING THIS THESE PLANS
WE HAVE PROJECTS ACROSS ALL THE
CATEGORIES YOU SEE ON THE
SCREEN.
WE BELIEVE THAT INVESTING
ACROSS CATEGORIES IS WHAT A
THRIVING DOWNTOWN NEEDS TO DO.
SO WHAT WE DID WAS USING THE
CITY'S STRATEGIC VALUE RANKING
SYSTEM.
WE RANKED EACH OF THOSE ONE
HUNDRED AND FIFTY PROJECTS.
WE THEN TOOK THE TOP PROJECTS
WITH THE MOST HIGHLY RANKED
PROJECT WITH PROJECTS WITHIN
EACH CATEGORY AND THOSE
PROJECTS BECAME PHASE ONE
OF OUR PLAN.
SO PHASE ONE IS THE FIRST TEN
YEARS OF THE PLAN STATUTE DOES
REQUIRE US TO HAVE AN IMPLEMENT
IMPLEMENTATION TIMELINE.
I'M NOT GOING TO GO THROUGH ALL
OF THESE PROJECTS WITH YOU
TONIGHT BUT WHAT I DO WANT TO
POINT OUT ARE THREE PROJECTS
THAT ARE ONLY POSSIBLE WITH
EXPANSION TO THE NORTH AND
THAT'S SEVEN TWENTY ONE NORTH
MAIN WE HAVE AN ESTIMATED EIGHT
MILLION DOLLARS SCHEDULED FOR
REMEDIATION AND LANDSCAPE WORK
AT THAT SITE.
THE NORTH MAIN STREETSCAPE
WHICH IS A STUDY AND DESIGN AND
SUPPORT FOR A POTENTIAL M DOT
JURISDICTIONAL TRANSFER OF THAT
ROAD AND THEN FINALLY THE FIFTH
AND DIVISION NORTH SOUTH BRT
THAT IS A CRITICAL PROJECT TO
IMPROVE TRANSIT.
THERE ARE SAFETY COMPONENTS.
THERE'S TWO WAY RESTORATION
FIFTH AND DIVISION.
IT'S A COMPLEX PROJECT THAT WE
COULD NOT PARTICIPATE IN IF OUR
BOUNDARY DOES NOT EXPAND.
>> AND THEN ON THE PROGRAM SIDE
THE FOUR PROGRAM CATEGORIES
YOU'RE GOING TO SEE IN THE PLAN
ARE A CONTINUATION OF WORK THAT
WE ARE ALREADY DOING.
WE'RE GOING TO CONTINUE TO
SUPPORT IN ALL OF THOSE AREAS
WITH THE EXCEPTION OF SERVICE
AND MAINTENANCE.
THIS IS THE AREA WHERE WE WANT
TO EXPAND OUR ROLE AND WE WANT
TO DO THAT BY ESTABLISHING A
DOWNTOWN SERVICE TEAM.
THE SERVICE TEAM WILL ADDRESS
THE SERVICE GAP THAT CURRENTLY
EXISTS TODAY.
WE KNOW THAT OUR DOWNTOWN NEEDS
MORE ATTENTION AND WE BELIEVE
THE SERVICE TEAM CAN GIVE TOWN
THE ATTENTION THAT IT NEEDS AND
DESERVES.
WE HEARD FROM COUNCIL BACK IN
APRIL A DESIRE FOR THESE
POSITIONS TO BE UNION POSITIONS
KNOW THAT WHEN WE ISSUE THE RFP
THAT WILL BE A PREFERENCE IN
THE RFP AND THEN ONTO NEXT
STEPS.
SO THE TIMELINE WHICH CONTINUES
TO BE FLUID BUT TOMORROW THE
DDA BOARD WILL BE VOTING TO PUT
THE PLAN FORWARD TO COUNCIL
PENDING LEGAL REVIEW.
SO ASSUMING THAT THE BOARD DOES
APPROVE THAT, I ANTICIPATE
COUNCIL'S FIRST ACTION WHICH
WOULD BE SETTING A RESOLUTION
OF INTENT WOULD BE COMING TO
YOU ALL TO SET THE PUBLIC
HEARING WILL PROBABLY HAPPEN
MAYBE IN OCTOBER WHICH WOULD
BRING OUR PUBLIC HEARING TO
NOVEMBER OR DECEMBER AND WE
BRING THE PLAN TO YOU IN
PROBABLY FEBRUARY.
BUT THIS TIMELINE CONTINUES TO
MOVE AND WE'LL CERTAINLY KEEP
YOU UPDATED ON THAT.
AND THEN FINALLY I JUST WANT TO
INVITE ALL OF YOU AND MEMBERS
OF OUR COMMUNITY TO OUR ANNUAL
A PALOOZA.
IT TAKES PLACE ON SATURDAY
SEPTEMBER 20TH FROM NOON TO TWO
AT THE OLD WILMONT OTHERWISE
KNOWN AS THREE FIFTY S FIFTH OR
THE CORNER OF WILLIAM AND 5TH.
>> SO I HOPE YOU ALL CAN MAKE
IT AND I THANK YOU SO MUCH.
>> THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
WE NOW COME TO PUBLIC COMMON
RESERVE TIME PUBLIC COMMENT
RESERVE TIME IS AN OPPORTUNITY
FOR MEMBERS OF THE PUBLIC TO
SPEAK TO COUNCIL AND THE
COMMUNITY ABOUT MATTERS
OF MUNICIPAL INTEREST TO SPEAK
OF PUBLIC COMMENT RESERVE TIME
ONE NEEDS TO HAVE SIGNED UP IN
ADVANCE BY CONTACTING OUR CITY
CLERK SPEAKERS INSTANCES.
WE'LL HAVE THREE MINUTES IN
WHICH TO SPEAK SO PLEASE PAY
CLOSE ATTENTION TO THE TIME OUR
CLERK OR THE TIME CLOCK WILL
NOTIFY YOU IN THIRTY SECONDS
OUR REMAINING AND WHEN YOUR
TIME HAS EXPIRED WHEN YOUR TIME
HAS EXPIRED PLEASE CONCLUDE
YOUR REMARKS AND CEDE THE
FLOOR.
OUR FIRST SPEAKER TODAY IS
FINBAR TONRY MARTIN
.
GOOD EVENING.
MAYOR AND COUNCIL MEMBERS.
MY NAME IS FINBAR AND I LIVE ON
DEXTER ROAD THE THIRTY TWO
HUNDRED BLOCK.
I'M HERE TONIGHT TO SPEAK ABOUT
A DANGER THAT AFFECTS PRETTY
MUCH EVERYONE ON OUR ROAD IS
WALKING OR BIKING AND THAT IS
SPEEDING ALTHOUGH THE POSTED
SPEED LIMIT IS THIRTY FIVE
PEOPLE ROUTINELY FLY BY AT
FIFTY OR SIXTY SOMETIMES THE
SPEED LIMIT I SEE IT EVERY DAY
WHEN I'M BIKING BECAUSE I
SOMETIMES BIKE TO SCHOOL.
I BIKED HERE TONIGHT SO THIS
SHOULD JUST BE AT THIRTY THIRTY
FIVE MILE AN HOUR ROAD BUT IT'S
REALLY A HIGH SPEED KIND OF CUT
THROUGH SO I WOULD JUST ASK
THAT YOU GUYS CONSIDER REDUCING
THE SPEED LIMIT PUTTING SOME
TRAFFIC CALMING AND STUFF LIKE
THAT JUST BECAUSE IT'S ONLY A
MATTER OF TIME BEFORE THERE'S
AN ACCIDENT OR WHATEVER AND I
JUST WANT TO BE GOOD.
PRETTY MUCH EVERYONE IGNORES
THE SPEED LIMIT ON OUR ROAD AND
IT'S JUST REALLY UNFORTUNATE
WHEN YOU'RE TRYING TO WALK OR
PUT OUT YOUR COMPOST BIN OR
WHATEVER.
I THINK A GOOD IDEA WOULD BE TO
PUT RF BEEBEES THE LIKE
FLASHING CROSSWALK THINGS I
KNOW IS PART OF THE VECTOR
SIDEWALK CROSSWALK PROJECT
INITIATIVE THAT'S GOING TO BE
HAPPENING.
THERE'S GOING TO BE CROSSWALKS
BUT I'M NOT SURE IF THERE'S
GOING TO BE THE FLASHING
BEACONS AS WELL.
I THINK ANOTHER GOOD THING
WOULD BE SPEED BUMPS AND ALSO
THOSE
RADAR SIGNS THAT POST
YOUR SPEED MAYBE GIVE SOME
ATTENTION TO THE DRIVERS I
DON'T KNOW AND THEN THE LAST
THING THAT'S SUPER, SUPER
IMPORTANT INCREASE POLICE
PRESENCE.
YOU GUYS COULD MAKE A TON
OF MONEY ON OUR ROAD WITH
TICKETS FOR SURE.
THERE'S NO DOUBT ABOUT THAT.
THAT'S PRETTY MUCH IT.
I KNOW ON MILLER ROAD THERE'S
GOING TO BE A GREAT PROJECT
THERE WITH THE DOUBLE BIKE LANE
AND REDUCE SPEED LIMIT AND
SPEED BUMPS.
SO IT'D BE AMAZING IF WE COULD
DO SOMETHING SIMILAR ON DEXTER
AND I IMAGINE THAT PEOPLE WILL
NOT WANT TO DRIVE MILLER QUITE
AS MUCH ONCE THAT PROJECT GOES
IN.
SO THEY MIGHT BE EVEN SPEEDING
MORE ON DEXTER ONCE THAT
PROJECT IS DONE.
SO PLEASE JUST FOR THE SAFETY
OF EVERYONE ON DEXTER ROAD, I
URGE YOU GUYS TO TAKE A TAKE A
LISTEN AND CONSIDER SOME
TRAFFIC CALMING ON DEXTER ROAD.
THANK YOU.
OUR NEXT SPEAKER IS JESSICA
KELLY.
THANK YOU, MAYOR.
THANK YOU.
CITY COUNCIL FOR HAVING ME
SPEAK.
I WAS HERE LAST TIME A COUPLE
OF TIMES AGO IN REGARDS TO MY
SON BRANDON KELLY.
HE WAS PICKED UP BY THE AND OUR
POLICE DEPARTMENT HOMELESS
SUFFERING CHRONIC MENTAL
ILLNESS.
THAT'S FOR TWO MONTHS LATER HE
FINALLY DID GO BEFORE THE
MENTAL HEALTH COURT.
HE WAS ORDERED TREATMENT BUT
THERE WAS SOME SWING WITH THAT
TO WHERE HE WAS NOT
HOSPITALIZED.
ALSO MY SON IS STILL SITTING IN
THE WASHINGTON COUNTY JAIL.
HE STATED THAT HE IS NOT
RECEIVING HYGIENE PRODUCTS AND
THIS IS VERY ALARMING TO ME
HAVING A SON SUFFERING FROM
CHRONIC MENTAL ILLNESS SINCE
TWENTY TWENTY TWO BEING PICKED
UP BY THE POLICE ON AN ALLEGED
CHARGE.
HE IS NOT BEING CONVICTED.
I JUST WANT TO MAKE THAT CLEAR
AND JUST SUFFERING FOR THE LAST
COUPLE OF MONTHS FROM CHRONIC
MENTAL ILLNESS WITHOUT
RECEIVING ANY TREATMENT AS I'M
STILL OUT HERE TRYING TO
ADVOCATE I DO NOT KNOW ABOUT
HIS WELL-BEING.
AS I STATED BEFORE WE HAVE NOT
SPOKEN SO I KNOW THERE ARE
SEVERAL PROGRAMS WITHIN THIS
COUNTY THAT CAN OFFER DIFFERENT
ALTERNATIVES FOR THOSE WHO ARE
CHRONICALLY MENTALLY ILL.
I DON'T KNOW THE REASONS FOR
WHY THAT WAS NOT IMPLEMENTED
WHEN HE WAS PICKED UP WITH THAT
KNOWN CHRONIC MENTAL ILLNESS
THAT HE HAD.
SO I'M JUST HERE HOPING THAT
YOU GUYS CAN COME TOGETHER TO
TRY TO COME UP WITH SOME TYPE
OF SOLUTION.
>> I DO KNOW THAT I HAVE
NOTICED THAT THERE IS A RISE IN
HOMELESSNESS BY SEVENTY SEVEN
PERCENT THAT'S TWENTY TWENTY
TWO AND I'M JUST REALLY
CONCERNED ABOUT OUR HOMELESS
POPULATION THAT IS SUFFERING
FROM MENTAL ILLNESS AND IT IS A
BIG DEAL.
I HAVE WITNESSED PEOPLE IN
COURT SPEAKING ON MY SON'S
BEHALF AND HIS CONDITION AND
LAUGHING IT'S NOT A LAUGHING
MATTER.
IT'S A VERY SERIOUS MATTER AND
IT NEEDS TO BE TAKEN VERY
SERIOUSLY NOW ONLY BY THE
COURTS, BY THE COUNCIL, BY THE
COMMUNITY AND ESPECIALLY BY OUR
LAW ENFORCEMENT.
>> THANK YOU FOR YOUR TIME.
THANK YOU.
OUR NEXT SPEAKER IS JEREMY
GOOD
EVENING, EVERYONE.
YOU MIGHT HAVE NOTICED THE NO
GLASSES CUT ON THE FACE.
I WAS INVOLVED WITH A FRIEND
WHILE THEY WERE DRIVING A LADY
RAN A STOP SIGN AND TIP ON THIS
MY SIDE 50 PLUS MILES AN HOUR
OR SO.
FORTUNATELY YOU HIT THE FRONT
HER FRONT RIGHT CORNER PANEL
MOSTLY WHAT STARTED ENCROACHING
ON MY DOOR.
SO I WAS ABLE BUT NOT ABLE TO
WALK OUT WITH THE LACERATION
CONCUSSION AND THE BLAST AND
ALL THAT GOOD STUFF SO SO FOR
ME I GUESS WHAT I LIKE TO TALK
ABOUT IS CITY PROPERTY AND
BUILDING AND PROPERTY THE
PARKING GARAGES SOMEONE TOLD ME
LONG TIME AGO YOU DON'T BUILD
ON PROPERTY YOU DON'T OWN AND I
THINK THAT IS THAT WOULD KIND
OF WHAT'S GONE ON WITH THE
PARKING GARAGES.
YOU'RE BUILDING THE GARAGES BUT
NOT OWNING THE PROPERTY UNDER
THE GARAGES IF I'M CORRECT AND
THAT WOULD BE A BAD INVESTMENT
FOR THIS CITY RESIDENTS BECAUSE
IT CONFLICTS OVER WHO OWNS WHAT
AND WHERE IS IT BE COMPLETELY
CITY OWNED AND WITH THE OPENING
OF THE NEW PARK THAT'S COMING
UP AND THE WHOLE NORTH THERE
HAS HAD ANOTHER MEETING WHERE
THE BASICALLY THOSE DEVELOPERS
DID ADMIT THAT THAT PROPERTY IS
NEVER GOING TO BE FULLY
REMEDIATED OF THE BLUE SOIL,
THE PERSIAN BLUE, THE FAIR
CYANIDE IS GOING TO BE CLEARED
OUT ABOUT THE FIRST TWO TO
THREE FOOT BUT BELOW THAT AND
IT'S STILL GOING TO BE POSSIBLY
IN FACT, YOU KNOW, CONTAMINATED
AND THE PARK THAT'S BEING BUILT
IT'S NOT GOING TO BE TO MY
KNOWLEDGE IT'S NOT GOING TO BE
A CITY PARK.
IT'S BE RUN AND MANAGED BY THE
LOWER HERE ON CONSERVATORY NGO
AND IT WAS HEARD THAT IT WAS
THE CITY TURNED DOWN THE OFFER
OF MAKING THAT A CITY PART.
SO I THINK IT'S NOT A GOOD IDEA
BECAUSE YOU'RE GOING TO SAY THE
CITY HAS SO MANY PARTS BUT IS
THIS GOING TO BE ALLOWED NOW
FOR ENTERPRISES AND NGOS TO
TAKE OVER PROPERTY AND CREATE
PARKS THAT THERE WILL GIVEN
THIS THING NOW YOU CAN GIVE
THIS NGO WANTS TO CREATE
ANOTHER PARK OVER HERE.
>> THEY'LL BUY SOME LAND, DO
THE SAME THING IT OPEN THE DOOR
PARKS ARE FOR OTHER PEOPLE AND
WHO ENFORCES THE RULES AND
REGULATIONS ON A PRIVATE PARK
PRETTY MUCH.
I MEAN IF SOMEBODY GETS
ASSAULTED HURT WHO COMES TO
POLICE AS PRIVATE PROPERTY.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK.
ARE THERE COMMUNICATIONS TODAY
FROM COUNCIL COUNCILOR
MCCONNELL
THE THANK YOU.
I WANTED TO ADDRESS SOME
INFORMATION THAT'S BEEN
FLOATING AROUND ON SOCIAL
REGARDING FOLKS NOT COMING
DOWNTOWN ANYMORE DOWNTOWN NOT
HAVING ANY BUSINESSES THAT ARE
OPENING AND PAINTING AN
UNNECESSARILY NEGATIVE VIEW
OF WHAT IS ACTUALLY THE REALITY
DOWNTOWN.
SO I WENT LOOKING FOR DATA AND
SO MY DATA SOURCES ARE COSTAR
WHICH IS THE RECOGNIZED LEADER
IN COMMERCIAL REAL ESTATE
INFORMATION.
IT HAS THE MOST COMPREHENSIVE
DATABASE OF REAL ESTATE DATA IN
THE UNITED STATES AND PLACER
A.I. WHICH HELPS TO MAKE REAL
ESTATE DECISIONS BASED ON
LOCATION, INTELLIGENCE AND FOOT
TRAFFIC INSIGHTS.
AND SO COMBINING THOSE TWO DATA
POINTS OR DATA PROVIDERS, THIS
WILL SURPRISE NO ONE THAT FOOT
TRAFFIC WAS PRETTY STEADY
DURING THE WEEKDAY AND FROM
AUGUST TWENTY EIGHTEEN TO JULY
TWENTY NINETEEN AND PREPEND
EMEK AND WHEN YOU COMPARE THE
SAME TIME FRAME INCLUDING ALL
DAYS OF THE WEEK AND ALL HOURS
FROM AUGUST TWENTY FIRST TO
JULY 20 SECONDS OR MOVING COVID
TIME PERIOD COMPARED YEAR OVER
YEAR THROUGH JULY TWENTY TWENTY
FIVE THE DATA SHOW THAT DAILY
ACTIVITY HAS INCREASED ACROSS
ALL DAYS OF THE WEEK AND THAT
THERE HAS BEEN STEADY
RECOVERY AND GROWTH SINCE THE
PANDEMIC COSTARS DATA SHOWS US
LOOKING AT JUST A DENHA AND
RETAIL PROPERTIES THOSE SERVING
HOSPITALITY AND RETAIL THAT
FROM A HIGH OF VACANCIES IN
TERMS OF MEASURED IN AVAILABLE
SQUARE FEET IN TWENTY TWENTY
THREE THAT MONTH OVER MONTH OUR
VACANCY RATE IS ACTUALLY DOWN
THAT IT HAS BEEN IMPROVING
STEADILY SINCE TWENTY TWENTY
THREE WHICH CORRELATES WITH THE
FOOT TRAFFIC IN THE VISITOR
DATA WHEN YOU COMBINE THOSE TWO
DATA POINTS IT'S A PRETTY
COMPELLING STORY.
IT'S ALSO REALLY IMPORTANT I
THINK TO NOTE THAT THE MONTHS
VACANT IN MARKET RIGHT NOW IS
ONE POINT FIVE.
SO THE AMOUNT OF TIME THAT
STOREFRONTS SIT VACANT CONTRARY
TO WHAT SOCIAL MEDIA MIGHT HAVE
YOU BELIEVE IS NOT ALL DOOM AND
GLOOM.
THIS IS STILL A DESIRABLE PLACE
FOR BUSINESSES TO WANT TO BE
AND STILL A DESIRABLE AND
STEALING FROM MISS THOMPSON'S
VIBRANT DOWNTOWN AND I THINK
IT'S REALLY IMPORTANT THAT WE
RECOGNIZE THAT THAT'S SOMETHING
AS A COMMUNITY WE SHOULD BE
PROUD OF THAT WE CAN SUPPORT
THAT TYPE OF BUSINESS ACTIVITY
IN OUR DOWNTOWN.
THE PEOPLE WANT TO COME HERE
AND START BUSINESSES AND PEOPLE
WANT TO COME DOWN AND ENJOY
DOWNTOWN.
SO I HOPE TO SEE YOU COME
DOWNTOWN AS MORE AND MORE
PEOPLE ARE DOING.
>> I THINK THAT'S REALLY
EXCITING.
AND ON THAT NOTE, A NEW
BUSINESS IS OPENING AND WORKING
THIS WEEKEND NEXT DOOR TO
DOWNTOWN HOME GARDEN.
IT'S CALLED RECESS CAFE.
IT IS A THIRD SPACE FOR WORKING
FAMILIES.
>> YES, SIR.
AND FINALLY SEPTEMBER 14TH TO
SEPTEMBER 20TH IS
NEIGHBORHOOD
WEEK IN ANN ARBOR.
>> AND IF YOU COULD GO BACK AND
GET INFORMATION YOU DID YOU
NAME THE BUSINESS RESUS CAFE ON
COUNCIL MEMBER A DENHA.
THANK YOU, MR. TAYLOR.
I JUST WANTED TO REMIND
COMMUNITY MEMBERS TO JOIN US IF
YOU'RE ABLE THIS THURSDAY AT
11:00 A.M. ON THE HURON SIDE
OF CITY HALL WHEN WE WILL PAY
TRIBUTE TO AN ARBOR'S
CONTRIBUTIONS TO OUR LGBTQ AND
HUMAN RIGHTS HISTORY WITH A
STATE HISTORICAL MARKER
HONORING FORMER COUNCIL MEMBERS
KAZATCHKINE KO WEXLER GREEK AND
THE CONTRIBUTIONS OF JIM TOYE.
THIS WILL BE THE FIRST LGBTQ
HISTORIC MARKER IN THE STATE.
AND I ALSO JUST WANT TO NOTE
HOW IMPORTANT THAT IS NOT JUST
TO ME PERSONALLY BUT I THINK
FOR OUR STATE AND OUR COMMUNITY
AT A TIME WHEN WE'RE SEEING
TRIBUTES TO THE SURVIVORS, TO
THE SURVIVORS AND VICTIMS
OF THE PULSE NIGHTCLUB BEING
TORN DOWN BY HOSTILE AND AND
FRANKLY HATE FILLED GOVERNMENTS
IN FLORIDA AND IN OTHER PLACES
,WE STILL LIVE IN A PLACE THAT
CELEBRATES THE DIVERSITY OF OUR
COMMUNITY, THAT CELEBRATES OUR
HISTORY.
AND I AM JUST GRATEFUL THAT WE
HAVE AN ADMINISTRATION HERE AT
THE STATE LEVEL AND AT THE CITY
LEVEL THAT CAN CELEBRATE AND
HONOR THAT AND SO I HOPE THAT
YOU WILL JOIN US.
FORMER COUNCIL MEMBER KAZA
TRINKO AND FORMER COUNCIL
MEMBER DE GREEK ALONG WITH A
REPRESENTATIVE FROM THE GYM
TWICE CENTER WILL BE PRESENT
AND SO IT SHOULD BE A WONDERFUL
EVENT.
>> I HOPE YOU WILL JOIN COUNCIL
MEMBER DISH.
>> THANK I'D LIKE TO THANK
COUNCIL MEMBER CORNELL FOR THE
EVIDENCE BASED PRESENTATION ON
THE HEALTH OF OUR DOWNTOWN
ALWAYS APPRECIATED.
THANK YOU FOR THE REMINDER
ABOUT THURSDAY.
LOOKING FORWARD TO IT.
I WANTED TO NOTE THAT COUNCIL
MEMBER HARRISON AND I HAD AN
INFORMATION SESSION LAST WEEK
LAST MONDAY AT THE LOWER TOWN
BAR AND CAFE ON THE
COMPREHENSIVE LAND USE PLAN AND
MAYOR TAYLOR ATTENDED AND BRET
LEONARD FIELDED QUESTIONS AND
THERE WERE 50 PEOPLE THERE.
SO WOW.
THANK YOU.
THAT WAS FANTASTIC.
AND ALWAYS VERY GRATEFUL FOR
THAT SPACE WHICH IS A NEW SPACE
IN OUR WARD AND IT'S A VERY
COMFORTABLE SPACE AND RECESS
CAFE BY THE WAY, IS A PLACE
WHERE CHILDREN AND THEIR
CARETAKERS CAN GO AND SOCIALIZE
AND DRINK A FULL RANGE
OF CHILDREN NOT THE CHILDREN.
>> YES, WE WERE VERY EXCITED ON
THE LIQUOR COMMISSION TO LIQUOR
COMMITTEE OR WHATEVER WE ARE
LICENSE COMMITTEE TO SEE THAT
PLACE.
>> SO THAT'S ALL COUNCIL MEMBER
RIGGS.
>> I JUST WANTED TO BRIEFLY
DRAW FOLKS ATTENTION TO
UNDERAGE COMMUNICATIONS FROM
THE CITY ADMINISTRATOR ON OUR
AGENDA TO THERE IS SUPPLEMENTAL
INFORMATION ABOUT 415 WEST
WASHINGTON AND CLINES LOT.
THOSE ARE TWO BIG DEVELOPING
PROJECTS AND VISION FOR THE
FIFTH WARD AND THIS HAS MORE
INFORMATION THAT WE AS COUNCIL
HAVE RECEIVED.
SO THE PUBLIC HAS SEEN WHAT WE
HAVE.
SO THANK YOU TO THE
ADMINISTRATOR FOR PLACING THAT
ON THIS AGENDA.
AND I IT'S MY UNDERSTANDING
THAT WE WILL BE HOPEFULLY
VOTING ON TAKING ACTION ON THIS
AT OUR NEXT COUNCIL MEETING.
>> FURTHER COMMUNICATION FROM
CITY COUNCIL BRAYER.
>> THANK YOU, MAYOR.
OVER THE WEEKEND I AND I KNOW
OTHER OF MY COLLEAGUES JOINED
THE ANN ARBOR DEMOCRATS THEIR
ANNUAL PICNIC WHERE WE WERE
ABLE TO HEAR FROM LABOR
PARTNERS ABOUT THE CHALLENGES
THEY'RE FACING ON THE FRONT
LINES.
ONE STORY THAT REALLY STOOD OUT
FOR ME CAME FROM THE
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY
WHERE MANAGEMENT IS ESCALATING
A CRACKDOWN ON UNIONS GOING SO
FAR AS TO TELL EMPLOYEES THAT
THEY MUST SEEK APPROVAL FROM
AGENCY MANAGEMENT AND ETHICS
OFFICIALS FOR WORKING WITH
THEIR UNION EVEN ON THEIR OWN
PERSONAL TIME.
THIS IS AN ATTACK ON EMPLOYEES
CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHT TO
ORGANIZE AND IT'S DEEPLY
TROUBLING HERE IN ANN ARBOR.
WE ARE PROUD TO STAND WITH
ORGANIZED LABOR.
WE'VE ADOPTED THE BEST VALUE
CONTRACTING POLICY THAT ALLOWS
THE CITIES TO PRIORITIZE
CONTRACTORS WHO ARE STRONG
PARTNERS WITH LABOR AND WE'VE
ENACTED AN ANTI SWEATSHOP
INITIATIVE TO HELP ENSURE THAT
THE PRODUCTS PURCHASED WITH
PUBLIC DOLLARS ARE MADE UNDER
FAIR CONDITIONS.
THESE ARE JUST TWO EXAMPLES
OF CONCRETE WAYS THAT WE CAN
ALIGN OUR VALUES WITH OUR
ACTIONS HERE IN THE CITY.
LABOR DAY IS A REMINDER THAT
THE PROTECTIONS WORKERS ENJOY
TODAY FROM FAIR WAGES TO SAFE
WORKPLACES TO THE WEEKEND WE
JUST CELEBRATED WE'RE ONE
THROUGH STRUGGLE AND THOSE
RIGHTS CAN NEVER BE TAKEN FOR
GRANTED.
THEY ARE UNDER ATTACK RIGHT NOW
AND WE MUST CONTINUE TO FIGHT
WHENEVER THEY ARE UNDER ATTACK
.
FURTHER COMMUNICATIONS FROM
COUNCIL
.
>> I WOULD LIKE TO NOMINATE THE
FOLLOWING APPOINTMENT FOR
APPROVAL AND A ONE STEP PROCESS
TO THE RENTERS COMMISSION TONA
PAICE MOVE BY COUNCIL DENHA
SECONDED BY COUNCILOR WATSON
DISCUSSION COUNCIL MEMBER
DENHA.
>> THANK YOU MAYOR.
I JUST WANTED TO BRIEFLY
ADDRESS THAT THE REASON WE
REQUESTED AND THE RENTERS
COMMISSIONER REQUESTED THE
MAYOR MOVE THIS IN A ONE STEP
PROCESS WAS BECAUSE IN ADDITION
TO A COUPLE OF VACANCIES WE'RE
TRYING TO FILL, WE HAD A
UNEXPECTED RESIGNATION BECAUSE
SOMEONE WAS MOVING AND SO WE
ACTUALLY DIDN'T HAVE A QUORUM
AT OUR LAST MEETING AND WE WANT
TO MAKE SURE THAT WE CAN GET
THAT COMMISSION BACK
OPERATIONAL AS THEY HAVE SOME
BUSINESS TO DO.
SO THANK YOU FOR YOUR
ACQUIESCENCE.
COUNSEL FOR DISCUSSION WELL IN
FAVOR OR OPPOSED IT'S APPROVED
WITH TEN COUNCIL MEMBERS
PRESENT THUS SATISFYING THE
EIGHT VOTE REQUIREMENT.
I'D LIKE TO RECOMMEND THE
FOLLOWING NOMINATIONS FOR YOUR
CONSIDERATION TO THE DOWNTOWN
DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY.
STEPHEN FISHER TO THE PUBLIC
MARKET ADVISORY COMMISSION WILL
BRINKERHOFF AND MARCUS FLORES
TO THE ANN ARBOR PUBLIC ART
COMMISSION.
GENEX CARTER AND JOHN JORDAN TO
THE EMPLOYEE RETIREMENT SYSTEM
BOARD OF TRUSTEES MARC FOSTER.
AND I'D ALSO LIKE TO NOTE THE
RESOLUTION TO APPOINT KALEEN
GETS THE PUBLIC MARKET
COMMISSION WHICH AS SHE IS ON
NONREADERS LECTURE WOULD
REQUIRE SEVEN VOTES WHEN THE
TIME COMES FOR THE DISCUSSION
THERE IS NO DISCUSSION.
>> THAT'S ME.
ALL RIGHT.
I HAVE NO FURTHER DISCUSSION.
>> WE NOW BEFORE HAVE BEFORE
ITS CONSENT AGENDA MOVE A
MOTION PLEASE TO APPROVE THE
CONSENT AGENDA MOVE BY COUNSEL
IA SECOND BY COUNCILOR HORNELL
DISCUSSION OF THE CONSENT
AGENDA COUNTERMARCH CORNELL I'M
JUST FEELING THE LOVE FOR ANN
ARBOR AND DOWNTOWN TODAY
TONIGHT I JUST WANT TO CALL
ATTENTION TO C SEVEN.
THIS IS REGARDING THE
UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN'S CENTER
FOR ADVANCED TRANSPORTATION AND
TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION KNOWN
AS DOOMTREE.
ANN ARBOR HAS LONG BEEN A
LIVING LAB FOR ENTREPRENEURS,
FOR STARTUPS AND FOR EMERGING
TECHNOLOGIES.
AND IT'S I THINK IT'S PRETTY
AWESOME TO SEE THAT THIS
TECHNOLOGY THAT IS BEING
DEVELOPED IN ANN ARBOR WILL
ALSO JOIN PRIVATE SECTOR
COMPANIES THAT ARE CHOOSING TO
DO THIS TYPE OF RESEARCH,
DEVELOPMENT AND TESTING IN ANN
ARBOR.
IT'S EXCITING TO KNOW THAT WE
ARE A PLACE WHERE A TECHNOLOGY
BASED AND INNOVATION BASED
ECONOMY IS SUCCESSFUL SETS US
APART FURTHER DISCUSSION OF THE
CONSENT AGENDA OR FAVOR OR
OPPOSED THE CONSENT AGENDA IS
APPROVED WITH TEN COUNCIL
MEMBERS PRESENT ALL VOTING IN
THE AFFIRMATIVE TO SATISFYING
THE EIGHT VOTE REQUIREMENT WITH
RESPECT TO A FIVE AND C EIGHT
AND SIX.
THANK YOU AND CNN.
>> WELL NOW IT'S GETTING A
LITTLE TOO MUCH TAKING GREAT
CARE JUST TO DETERMINE THAT
THERE ARE NO OTHERS AT THE
ABSENCE OF PUBLIC HEARINGS
TODAY.
MAY I HAVE A MOTION PLEASE TO
APPROVE THE REGULAR MEETING
MINUTES OF AUGUST 18 20 25 WHO
BY COUNCIL MEMBER WATSON
SECONDED BY COUNCILMAN HE HAD
ONE DISCUSSION PLEASE OF THE
MINUTES ON FABER POST.
>> THE MINUTES ARE APPROVED DC
ONE RESOLUTION TO APPROVE
PURCHASE OF PARKLAND ON FULLER
ROAD AT FURSTENBURG NATURE AREA
AND TO APPROPRIATE 108 FIVE ONE
HUNDRED EIGHT THOUSAND FIVE
HUNDRED DOLLARS FOR THE PURPOSE
MOVED BY COUNCILOR HARRISON
SECOND COUNCILOR DENHA
DISCUSSION PLEASE OF DC ONE
COUNCIL WATSON.
THIS RESOLUTION WOULD APPROVE
THE PURCHASE OF A PROPERTY
ADJACENT TO FURSTENBURG NATURE
AREA FOR PARKS PURPOSES THIS
PARCEL KNOWN AS THE VAN DOBOS
PROPERTY HAS ACCESS TO FULLER
ROAD BUT IS OTHERWISE
SURROUNDED BY FURSTENBURG
NATURE AREA.
THE PARCEL HAS BEEN USED AS A
PRIVATE GARDEN AND OUTDOOR
RECREATION SPACE OVER THE LAST
FIFTY YEARS AND HAS SEEN LITTLE
DISTURBANCE OVER THE LAST
DECADE MAKING IT EASY TO
ASSIMILATE INTO THE EXISTING
AREA.
ACQUIRING THIS MISSING PIECE
OF PROPERTY WILL PROTECT THE
RIVER RIVERFRONT NATURAL AREAS
AND PUBLIC ACCESS AND PREVENT
FURTHER POSSIBLE BOUNDARY
DISPUTES.
ANY RESIDENTS VISITING THE AREA
TODAY WOULD LIKELY THINK THE
PARCEL IS ALREADY A PART OF THE
NATURE AREA DUE TO ITS
APPEARANCE PURCHASING IT
MAINTAINS THE INTEGRITY
OF FURSTENBURG NATURE AREA
WHICH IS ONE OF AN ARBOR'S
ECOLOGICAL GEMS.
THIS PURCHASE WAS REVIEWED BY
THE LAND ACQUISITION COMMITTEE
OF THE PARKS ADVISORY
COMMISSION AND IN ADDITION
STAFF WAS ABLE TO REDUCE THE
PRICE TO ACQUIRE THE PARCEL
THROUGH NEGOTIATIONS WITH THE
LAND OWNER RESULTING IN A
DONATION OF ELEVEN PERCENT
OF THE APPRAISED VALUE OR TEN
THOUSAND DOLLARS AND THE
PURCHASE IS STILL CONTINGENT ON
SATISFACTORY TITLE WORK
SURVEYING ENVIRONMENTAL SITE
ASSESSMENT RESULTS.
I URGE YOU TO SUPPORT THIS.
I'M GRATEFUL TO STAFF FOR THEIR
NEGOTIATIONS IN ACQUIRING THIS
PARCEL.
>> FURTHER DISCUSSION WELL IN
FAVOR OR OPPOSED
IT IS APPROVED
THE TEN COUNCIL MEMBERS PRESENT
ALL VOTING THE AFFIRMATIVE THAT
SATISFYING THE EIGHT VOTE
REQUIREMENT TO HAVE THE
PLEASURE OF CLOSED SESSION
TODAY.
NO THANK YOU MAYOR.
WE HAVE BEFORE US THE CLERKS
SUPPORT OF COMMUNICATIONS
PETITIONS AND REFERRALS AND THE
MOTION PLEASE TO APPROVE THE
CLERK'S MOVE BY COUNCILOR DEAR
SECONDED BY COUNCIL MEMBER
HARRISON DISCUSSION OF THE
CLERK'S SUPPORT WHILE IN FAVOR
OPPOSE THE CLERK SUPPORT IS
APPROVED.
>> WE HAVE COMMUNICATIONS TODAY
FROM OUR CITY ATTORNEY.
NO THANK YOU MAYOR.
IN THE ABSENCE OF PUBLIC
COMMENT OVERFLOW MAYOR I HAVE A
MOTION TO ADJOURN PLEASE MOVE
BY COUNCILMAN BRITISH COUNCILOR
HARRISON DISCUSSION ON FAVOR
OPPOSED.
WE'RE ADJOURNED